---
layout: page
title: Stanford Courses Review
subtitle: My opinion of (mostly math, music, and CS classes) at Stanford as I take them. My journey to a 4-year (hopefully?) CS coterm.
cover-img: /assets/img/8c2b9fa.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/stanford.jpg
share-img: /assets/img/stanford.jpg
tags: [stanford, math, music, cs, programming]
---
## Freshman Year
### Fall Quarter (17 units)
I heard figuring out Stanford was 3 units in itself, so this quarter I tested the waters with some classics (CS 106B and Math 51).<br>
**Programming Abstractions (CS 106B- 5 units):**<br>
Wow, this class was big. But then again, many college classes are. Many of my classmates seemed to already be experts at algorithms, so the exams were tough. I myself had around 2 years of Java experience when I took 106B (AP CSA and Data Structures). The assignments were a significant time investment (10-15 hours a week), and I knew others who took much longer. I think 106B is a solid overview of "interview"-esque programming topics. Looking back, I wish the assignment grades were more transparent and the online exams were C++ files.<br>
**Linear Algebra, Multivariable Calculus, and Modern Applications (MATH 51- 5 units):**<br>
The math classes at Stanford go fast. I liked this class and the way Linear Algebra is presented, as the homework questions are a nice balance between "straight from the book" and "write me an essay." The professor had detailed notes for us, but one qualm I had was that often, she would take too much time with the first few topics and have to rush through the rest of the content when there wasn't much time left in class. The exam problems were much harder than any math problem I've ever done in school, but they're reasonable and really make you dig deep into your knowledge (or lack thereof). Another thing to watch out for is if students score too well on the first one or two exams (B+ to A average), the next test is usually killer.<br>
**Our Genome (THINK 68- 4 units):**<br>
The professor for the class (Gil Chu) is very nice, and the discussions focus on a plethora of biology-related topics like eugenics, CRISPR, abortion, and sperm donation. The content covered is interesting, though despite the focus on ethics, many conversations seemed one-sided. Overall, the coursework isn't bad for 4 units, with regular textbook readings and writing assignments.<br>
**SSEA + SSEA Seminar (ENGR 2(A)- 2 + 1 units):**<br>
The Stanford Summer Engineering Academy (SSEA) program was some of the most fun I've ever had in my life. You get to meet your future classmates, take trips around the Bay Area, explore campus, and listen to a lot of cool speakers. The classes (a tasting of 106A or B and Math 51) don't really prepare you for the intensity of their actual counterparts, but they help you get acquainted with some of their concepts. The directors and RAs of SSEA are very friendly and helpful and will keep in contact with you long after the program ends. 10/10, would recommend.
### Winter Quarter (20 units)
**Mathematical Foundations of Computing (CS 103- 5 units)**<br>
I may be biased because I love proofs, but this was my first formal proof-writing class. I think it's a great introduction to them, though I know many people who don't like how the class is super picky with wording and emphasizes meticulosity (ex: forgetting to use "arbitrary" or messing up one word in a definition). The problem sets take a long time, but your homework will look very nice written in LaTeX. <br>
**Differential Equations with Linear Algebra, Fourier Methods, and Modern Applications (MATH 53- 5 units)**<br>
Another very fast math class. It's very easy to get lost during the last few chapters about Fourier and basic partial diff eqs. My friends who also took the class recommend office hours for the problem sets. And as for many math + p-set heavy classes, try to find a group to study with. The material covered turned out to be very useful for my neurocomputation research, though if you're more of a CS person, maybe taking another linear algebra class would be better. I liked this class though-- diff eqs are very cool.<br>
**Writing & Rhetoric 1: Numbers, Metrics, and Counting: The Rhetoric of Quantitative Thinking (PWR 1MGE- 4 units)**<br>
I was lucky to get a chill and lenient teacher for this one, though it's hit or miss with PWR intensity. Expect three major assignments (a few thousand words) and a smattering of readings in between. It seems like all the CS buffs take this one (probably because it has "quantitative" in the name), so it's a good class if you're allergic to Humanities. If you're not though, it's worth putting effort into the readings and writings too.<br>
**Music History 1600-1830 (MUSIC 41- 4 units)**<br>
Very small class, less than 10 people. There's basically a mini-response due every class (3 times a week), but the associated reading or watching is old stuff and takes around an hour or two (unless you skim it :^). All of these little assignments combined (with a few group projects and bigger assignments) made this class more work than my PWR. The classes are basically all discussions too (but why did they have to make them one and a half hours long?). I considered myself already pretty knowledgable about music history, but I sure did learn a lot more about Baroque and Classical music history though.<br>
**Advanced Piano (MUSIC 272A- 2 units)**<br>
It's just piano lessons. Nice teacher. I played a movement of a Haydn Sonata and Debussy's Prelude No. 9 (The Interrupted Serenade).<br>
### Spring Quarter (20 units)
**Computer Organization and Systems (CS 107- 5 units)**<br>
The CS weeder class. [Programming in C](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tas0O586t80) (and a bit of Assembly) may not be for everyone, but I think it's great to get down in the muck with computers. The assignments in this class take a long time for how innocuous their descriptions seem (thanks, C), but they're well worth it considering you become familiar with Linuxing, emacs, and [bomb-defusing](https://web.stanford.edu/class/archive/cs/cs107/cs107.1166/assign5/)). For me, this class wasn't as difficult as many claimed it to be, but I did have to put a good bit of effort to get a good grade.<br>
**Introduction to Probability for Computer Scientists (CS 109- 5 units)**<br>
One of the "easier" of the required CS classes. If you have a good stats background going in, much of the first week or so's content (basic probability, combinations/permutations) should be cake. You'll also get a small intro to how machine learning works in the last few weeks and do some basic ML yourself in Python. The p-sets also don't take too long, and you do them in this nice, online app. The professor I took this with (Jerry Cain) is very entertaining and cares about his students (though he did make our final very hard). About halfway through the quarter, the staff will announce a probability challenge that will boost your grade if you make a submission. I recommend participating in it (mostly because I [won](https://zoo-of-distributions.github.io/)) because you're free to do whatever and make your project as cool as you want.<br>
**Computer Science Research (CS 197- 3 units)**<br>
This class helps prepare you for summer research. Throughout the quarter, I slowly wrote a research proposal (with the intro, related works, evaluation plan, etc. being separate assignments). You'll get a lot of 1-on-1s with the instructor, and they're very helpful and understanding of people who are new to research. The assignments were a bit difficult for me because I'd never done research before, but this class teaches you the rundown of how knowledge-production works, and it teaches it well.<br>
**Music History Since 1830 (MUSIC 42- 4 units)**<br>
Compared to the previous installment in the Music 40 series, this class only has three writing responses and one final writing project. However, it does have a take-home midterm and final that you really have to know your stuff for. Like Music 41, Music 42 is a discussion-focused class which is 1 and a half hours long. I like the focus on female and non-Caucasian composers (I never realized so many composers were Germany/some other European countries-centered). The final project also allows you to write about basically whatever music you want (after 1830, of course).<br>
**Advanced Piano (MUSIC 272A- 2 units)**<br>
More piano lessons. I played anoher movement of the Haydn Sonata and Webern's Piano Variations Mvmt. 1 (atonal music, yay).<br>
**Piano Literature (MUSIC 155A- 1 unit)**<br>
This class may be 1 unit, but it has an online midterm and final that requires you to identify excerpts from a long list of piano pieces (provided to you, of course) and remember some stuff the professor talks about during lecture. If you take it during spring, this class will cover Romantic to Contemporary composers while the fall and winter iterations of this class cover earlier folks. I did my CS assignments and talked on discord during this class, but it's not bad. I wouldn't mind taking it twice more.
